Joint nowcasting slides (#211)
nfidd/nfidd: sessions/nowcasting.qmd

This may not be a good assumption in a rapidly changing epidemic (where the reproduction number is not near 1).
:::

## What happens if we get the delay distribution wrong?

> In practice, we often do not know the delay distribution and so need to estimate it from the data. In the [session on biases in delay distributions](sessions/biases-in-delay-distributions.qmd) we saw how we could estimate the delay distribution from the data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In practice, we often do not know the delay distribution and so need to estimate it using the data at hand. 
In the [session on biases in delay distributions](sessions/biases-in-delay-distributions) we saw how we could do this using individual-level records.
```

> Here we will see what happens if we get the delay distribution wrong.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will now look at what happens if we get the delay distribution wrong.
```
don't feel strongly but wasn't immediately clear to me what is meant by "here"

> W use the same data as before but now assume that the delay distribution is a gamma distribution with shape 2 and rate 3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We use the same data as before but now assume that the delay distribution is a gamma distribution with shape 2 and rate 3.
```

This is a very different distribution to the lognormal distribution we used to simulate the data.

```{r gamma-dist}
wrong_proportion_reported <- pgamma(1:15, 2, 3)
plot(wrong_proportion_reported)
```

We first need to update the data to use this new delay distribution:

```{r wrong-delay-data}
wrong_delay_data <- data
wrong_delay_data$report_cdf <- wrong_proportion_reported
```

We now fit the nowcasting model with the wrong delay distribution:

```{r gamma-nowcast-fit}
gamma_nowcast_fit <- rw_mod$sample(
  data = wrong_delay_data, parallel_chains = 4, refresh = ifelse(interactive(), 50, 0), show_exceptions = FALSE, show_messages = FALSE
)
gamma_nowcast_fit
```

> Again we can extract the nowcast onsets and plot them alongside the observed data:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Again we can extract the nowcast of symptom onsets and plot it alongside the observed data:
```

```{r gamma-nowcast-onsets}
gamma_nowcast_onsets <- gamma_nowcast_fit |>
  gather_draws(onsets[day]) |>
  ungroup() |>
  filter(.draw %in% sample(.draw, 100)) |> ## sample 100 iterations randomly
  mutate(day = day + 1)
```

```{r gamma-plot_nowcast}
ggplot(gamma_nowcast_onsets, aes(x = day)) +
  geom_col(data = reported_onset_df, mapping = aes(y = onsets)) +
  geom_line(mapping = aes(y = .value, group = .draw), alpha = 0.1)
```

::: {.callout-tip}
## Take 2 minutes
What do you think of the nowcast now? How would you know you had the wrong delay if you didn't have the true delay distribution?
:::

::: {.callout-note collapse="true"}
## Solution

> - The nowcast now looks very different to the observed data. This is because the model is now using the wrong delay distribution to nowcast the data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The nowcast now looks very different to the observed data. This is because the model is using the wrong delay distribution to nowcast the data.
```
(double "now")

> - If you didn't have the true delay distribution you would not know that you had the wrong delay distribution. This is why it is important to estimate the delay distribution from the data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The situation we had above where the delay distribution is known is not a realistic one. Usually we have to estimate the delay distribution from the data.
```
Is that what you mean? I wasn't sure.

> - In practice, you would likely compare the nowcast to the observed data and if they did not match you would consider whether the delay distribution was the cause.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In practice, you would likely compare the nowcast to the observed data and if it did not match you should consider whether the delay distribution was the cause.
```
can we add any pointer to what else it might be / what else to look for?
